+++
title = "Welcome: 04 amd64"
weight = 4
+++

## AMD64: ISA and ASM

Intel released the 8086 processor in 1978. It was based on the earlier 8008
processor from 1972, but...

The 8086 was a 16-bit microproessor. That means:

 - It had a 16-bit data bus connecting it to memory and maybe other stuff.
   - That means a processor and RAM connected by 16 wires.
 - How much RAM can we address with 16 bits?
 - In addtion to RAM, this system gives us another place to put stuff called
   registers. For a 16-bit processor, each register is 16 bits.
 - The 8086 had 9-ish registers:
   - "general purpose": ax, cx, dx, bx, si, di, bp, sp,
   - "special purpose": ip, (segment registers, status register)
 - What processors do is execute instructions. Kinds of instructions:
   - Arithmetic: Example: add $5, %cx
   - Test: cmp $5, %cx
   - Conditional branch: jge bigger_label
   - Movement instruction: mov (%sp), %dx
   - A bunch of other stuff. You'll want to have a reference sheet.
 - Instructions tend to operate on at least one register.
 - Instructions can operate on memory addresses. If they do, the CPU needs
   to stop and read or write from RAM.

The 80386 or i386 was a 32-bit microprocessor, backwards compatible with
the 8086. This was the first "Intel x86" processor:

 - It had a 32-bit data bus.
   - How much RAM can we address with 32-bits?
 - It had 32-bit registers.
   - If you used the old names (eg. %ax), you got the least significant
     16-bits of the register.
   - Each register got a new name with an "e" at the front to refer to
     the full 32 bit "extended" register:
     - eax, ecx, edx, ...

The AMD Athlon 64 was a 64-bit microprocessor, backwards compatible with the Intel
8086 and i386. This was the first "AMD64" processor:

 - It had a 48-bit data bus, designed to be extended up to 64-bit later.
   - How much RAM can we address with 64 bits?
   - How about 48 bits?
 - It had 64-bit registers.
   - If you used the old names (e.g. %ax, %rax), you got the least significant
     16 or 32 bits of the register.
   - Each register got a new name with an "r" at the front to refer to
     the full 64 bit register.
     - rax, rcx, rdx, ...
   - 8 new general purpose registers were added: %r9, %r10, ..., %r15

And that's where we are today. Let's write an add2 program by hand in amd64
assembly:

```
# add2.s

  .global main
  
  .text
# long add2(long x)
#   - the argument comes in in %rdi
#   - we return the result by putting it in %rax
add2:
  enter $0, $0
 
  # long y = x;
  mov %rdi, %rax
  
  # y = y + 2;
  add $2, %rax

  # return y;
  leave
  ret

main:
  enter $0, $0

  # long x = 5;
  mov $5, %rdi
  
  # y = add1(x)
  call add2
  # result in %rax

# printf("%ld\n", y)
#  - first arg goes in %rdi
#  - second arg goes in %rsi
#  - for a variable arg function, we need to zero %al
#    - %al is the bottom 8 bits of %ax/%eax/%rax
  mov $long_fmt, %rdi
  mov %rax, %rsi
  mov $0, %al
  call printf

  leave
  ret
  
  .data
long_fmt: .string "%ld\n"
```

To compile this simple hand-written assembly, we use:

```
$ gcc -no-pie -o add2 add2.s
```
