+++
title = "Welcome: 05 Homework 01"
weight = 5
+++

## Set Up a VM

A local Linux VM:

 - The easiest way to do programming work is to have the development
   environment installed locally on your personal computer.
 - For Linux systems programming, Linux *is* our development environment.
 - Having it installed as your main OS is probably best.
 - But, for consistentency, the assignment is for everyone to install
   exactly Debian 10 64-bit in a VirtualBox virtual machine.
 - If you aren't developing on the VM and you run into weird problems later in
   the semester, use this VM to rule out configuration issues.

The CCIS server:

 - ssh ntuck@login.ccs.neu.edu
 - This is a shared Linux server.
 - This is a generally useful tool, and it will be possible
   to do some of your homework on this server.
 - Working directly on a remote server is a good reason to learn
   a command line editor like vim.
   
 - Show Putty, WinSCP web page
 - Show ssh and scp on Linux
 - Show Cyberduck page

## Write Some Code

 - Download starter code.
 - Write some simple C and ASM code.
 - Make sure it compiles and runs.
 - Pack it back up and submit.

This assignment is mostly about structure, process, and getting annoyed
at the autograder.

Keep in mind:

 - A C (or asm) program is a collection of functions. 
 - These functions can be in one source file or in a bunch of different files.
 - C functions and ASM functions are the same thing. You can mix them together
   in the same program.
 - It's easiest if each file is all-C or all-ASM.

Object file example:

 - add1.c
 - add2.c
 - main.c

```
$ gcc -c -o add1.o add1.c
$ gcc -c -o add2.c add2.c
$ ...
$ gcc -o example add1.o add2.o main.o
```
